     Joga Krishna Sai et al.; International Journal of Advance Research, Ideas and Innovations in Technology




                                                   ISSN: 2454-132X
                                                  Impact factor: 4.295
                                                   (Volume 5, Issue 2)
                                           Available online at: www.ijariit.com
   3D reconstruction of regular objects from multiple 2D images
                     using a reference object
                   Krishna Sai Joga                                                    K. Kavya Sree
              krishnasaijoga@gmail.com                                            kavyak0298@gmail.com
 Anil Neerukonda Institute of Technology and Sciences,              Anil Neerukonda Institute of Technology and Sciences,
           Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh                                      Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh

                  Navya Spandana                                                     G. Gowri Pushpa
         knavyaspandana.15.cse@anits.edu.in                                    gowripushpa.cse@anits.edu.in
 Anil Neerukonda Institute of Technology and Sciences,              Anil Neerukonda Institute of Technology and Sciences,
           Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh                                      Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh

                                                         ABSTRACT
The dimensional analysis of an object from an image reduces a lot of burden for a user, like the traditional measuring tape
method. Using the dimensions will make reconstruction of the 3D model of the real-time object easier. However, this method is
not used in the current implementation. Dimensional analysis can also be helpful in online shopping where the user’s
availability for fitting is not possible. 3D model replaces the fitting stage in online shopping. Once the dimensions of an
object’s surface are found, it is easy to calculate surface areas, given surface areas we can calculate volume. But the
calculation of volume requires more than one dimension of the object. In this paper, an approach using a reference object,
whose real-time dimensions are already known is used. The whole process is divided into three tasks - Object detection using
SURF algorithm, Dimensional Analysis of the 2D object using pixel per metric ratio given that there is a reference object on
the same plane and 3D reconstruction using Structure from Motion algorithm.

Keywords— Object detection, SURF, Dimensional analysis, Pixel per metric, 3D reconstruction, Structure from motion
1. INTRODUCTION
Computer vision [1] is a wide area that deals with image extraction, segmentation and 3D reconstruction[11]. The dimensional
analysis involves the calculation of real-time dimensions of an object like length and breadth. The traditional method of
calculating dimensions of an object is using a measuring tape, a scale, vernier calliper or any physical measuring device. These
methods might not be feasible for all real-world applications. When dimensions of an object from a digital image are already
known, calculation of surface area, volume, weight, density (if the mass is known) can be done easily. The evolution of
smartphones has increased the availability of digital cameras, using them is much than measuring tapes. Dimensions of height and
breadth can be calculated using a single 2D image, another view of the object is required to get the information necessary for
depth calculation. However, 3D object reconstruction [11] requires multiple 2D images. The proposed model uses a reference
object along with the main object in the image. It can be a matchbox, rupee coin, measuring scale, etc.

In this paper, a method is described for the calculation of dimensions of an object using a reference object on the same plane. It
employs SURF [2] algorithm to detect the reference object, which can be one among matchbox, rupee coin, etc. whose real-time
dimensions are already known. After knowing the reference object, by using canny edge detection we get edges of the required
object. Using pixel per metric ratio we can find the dimensions of the required object in a 2D image. In order to find the
dimensions of the required object, we place a reference object with it as mentioned above.

There are few limitations here, the size of the reference object is known to us and SURF [9] algorithm considers the leftmost
object in the image as the reference object and maps the image with the keyholes and edges of the images in the dataset. After
mapping the keyholes, the image is recognised and then comes dimensional analysis. Canny edge detection [13] is applied only
after implementing gaussian blur to the 2D image. The Gaussian filter smoothens the image to reduce noise and unwanted details
and textures. The Canny edge detector detects the edges of the objects in the image and leftover edges can be corrected by
applying to dilate and erode technique. Then pixel_per_metric[12] method is applied to calculate the no. of pixels per metric, this
determines the size of the objects in the 2D image.
© 2019, www.IJARIIT.com All Rights Reserved                                                                            Page | 589
    Joga Krishna Sai et al.; International Journal of Advance Research, Ideas and Innovations in Technology
2. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
The system implements two modules to produce the desired output. One being dimensional analysis, where the dimensions of the
main object are calculated using the already known dimensions of the reference object. The next step is 3D Reconstruction, where
the input images and object dimensions are used to reconstruct the 3D object.




                                       Fig. 1: 3D Reconstruction of System Architecture

3. PROPOSED METHOD
The proposed model performs three tasks - object recognition, dimensional analysis and 3D reconstruction. For object recognition,
the input 2D image consists of the main object and a reference object lying on the same plane. The main object is restricted to be a
regular one. The reference object can be a coin, matchbox, Rubix cube, etc. whose real-time dimensions are already known.
SURF[9] algorithm is used for the recognition of both the main object and the reference object. Once the objects are recognized,
using the real-time dimensions of the reference object we can calculate it's dimensioned in the image. Later, using the available
information and pixels per metric ratio method we can calculate the dimensions of the main object from the image. Over the years,
many projects have been developed for object recognition, dimensional analysis and 3D reconstructions individually. We plan on
developing a single project that’ll perform all these tasks.
  Object Recognition
  Dimensional Analysis
  3D Reconstruction

3.1 Object Recognition
For object recognition, SURF[2] (Speeded-up Robust Features) algorithm is used. Prior to this algorithm SIFT[10] algorithm is
used, but it was comparatively slow and people needed a speeded-up version. In 2006, Bay H., Tuytelaars T. and Van Gool L.
introduced SURF[2]. For finding scale-space, in SIFT[10], Lower approximated Laplacian of Gaussian(LoG)[3] whereas SURF
approximates LoG with a box filter. The advantage of such approximation is that convolution with the box can be easily
calculated with the help of integral images. And it can be done in parallel for different scales. Also, SURF relies on the
determinant of the Hessian matrix for both scale and location.
For feature description, SURF[2] uses wavelet responses in both vertical and horizontal directions. A neighbourhood of 20sX20s,
where s is size, is taken around key point, which is further divided into 4X4 subregions. For each subregion, horizontal, vertical
wavelet responses are taken and a vector of form is formed. This gives SURF[9] feature descriptor with 64 dimensions. For more
distinctiveness, SURF[9] has an extended 128 dimension version.

                                              𝜐 = (∑ 𝑑𝑥 , ∑ 𝑑𝑦 , ∑ |𝑑𝑥 | , ∑ |𝑑𝑦 |)                                               (1)

3.2 Dimensional Analysis
To calculate dimensions of an object from an image there are two methods: Focal length method and pixel density method. Focal
length method works on a principle of pinhole projection formula[4][5], which states that ratio of object length in terms of pixels
to real-world dimensions of an object is equal to the ratio of focal length of the camera to distance between camera and object.
The formula below:
                                                            x/f = X/D                                                            (2)

In the above formula, we have a length of the object in terms of pixels(x), real-world length of the object(X), the focal length of a
camera lens(f) and a distance between camera lens and object(D). This can be used to calculate real-world dimensions of the
object. For this method, we need to know the distance between the camera and lens(D), which is an extra parameter for us.

© 2019, www.IJARIIT.com All Rights Reserved                                                                              Page | 590
     Joga Krishna Sai et al.; International Journal of Advance Research, Ideas and Innovations in Technology
                                                                𝑂𝑝𝑏 ∗ 𝑅𝑟𝑏
                                                       𝑂𝑟𝑏 =
                                                                   𝑅𝑝𝑏

                                                                𝑂𝑝𝑙 ∗ 𝑅𝑟𝑙                                                      (3)
                                                        𝑂𝑟𝑙 =
                                                                   𝑅𝑝𝑙

Pixel Density method requires a reference object in the plane along with the object. The reference object is one whose real-world
dimensions are known prior to us. The user is free to choose any object as a reference object gave it satisfies given conditions:
  The reference object is coplanar with the object in the image
  The reference object is easily identifiable in the image

To know the pixel lengths of the objects, lines are drawn around the edges of the objects in the image. Then using Euclidean
distances from points we get pixel lengths. Using the real world length of the reference object, pixel lengths of the reference
object, we get Conversion Factor(CF). CF is the ratio of object_width/known_width, where object_width is real-world dimensions
of the object and known_width is real-world dimensions of the reference object. This CF is required to convert dimensions from
the image(pixel length) to real-world dimensions.




Fig. 2: Edges drawn around the object for dimensional analysis               Fig. 3: Reference Object and Require Object

The proposed model detects objects that are trained with images which contain objects including the reference object. This
reference object when detected we get its dimensions. This model is an automated approach where objects are detected as
contours in the image and find its dimensions. The images are loaded from the hard drive of the computer, they are converted to
grayscale and smoothened using 9X9 gaussian filter.

The Gaussian filter is highly effective to remove noise from the image. To create an edge map of all objects in an image, the
Canny edge detector is used. Dilation and erosion are used to fill in any gaps generated in the edge map. In this method, a
threshold of 100 is used, assuming that the object of interest occupies the majority of the area. An object occupying less than the
threshold is automatically ignored as an edge. And ones with the area above threshold, bounding boxes are drawn around objects
in the image. As CF ratio is already defined, we calculate the real world dimensions from the pixel lengths we get from boxes
drawn.

3.3 3D Reconstruction
Photorealistic 3D models are used in a wide variety of applications like movies, games, through to simulation, training,
reconstruction of historic monuments. In this model, we propose to use the Structure from Motion(SfM) technique. This technique
uses multiple 2D images of a scene or an object to generate a point cloud-based 3D model similar to LiDAR technique. It results
in a high definition 3D model using consumer grade cameras. SfM is based on stereophotogrammetry[], which uses triangulation
to calculate relative 3D positions from stereo pairs. Given different overlapping images, key points or matching features are
detected. These distinguishing features are usually corners or line segments.

These features are tracked from image to image to produce camera positions and orientations in 3D space, which is a point cloud.
The minimum requirement for SfM to work is a minimum of three visible images. More the number of images SfM works better.
For faster processing and better quality of the model, it is better to have the images taken at the same time with the same camera
but this is not a requirement.

Scene Reconstruction
Step 1: Automatically estimate position, orientation and focal length of the camera
Step 2: Plot 3D position of feature points in 3D cloud space




© 2019, www.IJARIIT.com All Rights Reserved                                                                            Page | 591
     Joga Krishna Sai et al.; International Journal of Advance Research, Ideas and Innovations in Technology




                                            Fig. 4: Flow chart of 3D reconstruction

Bundle Adjustment: Structure-from-motion is the problem of recovering the 3D structure of the scene and the camera motion
from a set of images. Bundle adjustment is a particular optimization algorithm used to solve it. When the cameras' intrinsic
parameters and camera extrinsic parameters (i. e. camera poses) are known, you can actually compute the point cloud from the
matching points using multi-view triangulation without bundle adjustment. You need to do nonlinear optimization when your
estimate of the camera poses is uncertain, and bundle adjustment is the standard algorithm used for that. Multi-view structure from
motion (SfM) estimates the position and orientation of pictures in a common 3D coordinate frame. When views are treated
incrementally, this external calibration can be subject to drift, contrary to global methods that distribute residual errors evenly.
Here the method proposes a new global calibration approach based on the fusion of relative motions between image pairs.

Preprocessing: In this paper, contraharmonic mean[14] based JPEG compression algorithm is gaged. The images compressed
with the suggested approaches hold less encoded bits and as a result transmission rate is enhanced. The contraharmonic mean is
higher in value than the arithmetic means and also higher than the root mean square. The name contraharmonic may be due to the
fact that when taking the mean of only two variables, the contraharmonic mean is as high above the arithmetic mean as the
arithmetic mean is above the harmonic mean (i.e., the arithmetic mean of the two variables is equal to the arithmetic mean of their
harmonic and contraharmonic means).

4. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
We implemented a dimensional analysis on the input image in figure 5 and obtain the desired output in figure 6. The proposed
system is tested extensively for accuracy and general behaviour using both real and synthetic datasets. The implementation is
written in python, and results are obtained on a MacBook Pro with a 2.66 GHz Intel Core i7 processor and 4GB of RAM, running
Mac OS X Mavericks 10.9.1.




             Fig. 5: Input image for dimensional analysis                 Fig. 6: Output of Dimensional analysis




                          Fig. 7: 3D Model (1)                                      Fig. 8: 3D Model (2)


© 2019, www.IJARIIT.com All Rights Reserved                                                                             Page | 592
    Joga Krishna Sai et al.; International Journal of Advance Research, Ideas and Innovations in Technology




                          Fig. 9: 3D Model (3)                                     Fig. 10: 3D Model (4)

                 Table 1: 3D reconstruction results: Comparison between our method and classical method
                                            Approach                  Time Calculation

                                   Our method                                 96

                                   Classical method[6]                       147

Table 1 represents the comparison between our method and the classical method [6] in function of calculation time and re-
projection error. By using an incremental approach with the integration of a local bundle adjustment [7] that allows us to reduce
the calculation time required for the global bundle adjustment [8] and also allows us to improve the 3D reconstruction quality.




       Fig. 11: Calculation Time of proposed method                      Fig. 12: Calculation Time of classical method

The above figures represent table 1 in the form of a bar graph which is a comparison between the time taken by the system to
reconstruct the 3D model using a fixed number of 8 2D images.

5. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we discussed various modules like object detection, dimensional analysis and 3D reconstruction. There are various
methods to implement these modules. The proposed methods gave very promising results. However, there is a lot of scope for
extension and better accuracy. This paper presents a hybrid 3D reconstruction system that combines photogrammetry with SfM
techniques. The system uses photogrammetric information to enhance the accuracy of SfM results. SfM provides a dense
reconstruction, while photogrammetry is used to correct camera parameters or scene points that have high uncertainty. This
procedure permits measurements between points that do not have corresponding targets, maintains the required metrological
accuracy, and provides a more complete reconstruction than with either method alone. Results generated by the hybrid system for
real and synthetic data demonstrate that both more accurate and denser reconstructions are obtained than with SfM alone.

The development of hybrid systems for 3D reconstruction helps improve both photogrammetry and structure-from-motion. The
continued exploration of combining techniques in these fields may lead to both the improvement of current algorithms and the
development of new ones. Investigation of photogrammetry-assisted volume-based reconstruction is an interesting and important
topic for future applications. Moreover, additional visualization techniques are needed to show reconstruction accuracy, and to
highlight key locations at which to place photogrammetry targets so that overall reconstruction accuracy is improved.

6. REFERENCES
[1] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_vision
[2] Herbert Bay, Tinne Tuytelaars and Luc Van Gool, SURF: Speed-up Robust Features,
[3] Brice, 2012, How to get the real-life size of an object from an image, when not knowing the distance between the object and
    the camera, StackOverflow, Available at http://stackoverflow.com/questions/9940140/how-to-get-the-real-lifesize-of-an-
    object-from-an-image-when-not-knowing-the-d, Cambridge, UK.


© 2019, www.IJARIIT.com All Rights Reserved                                                                          Page | 593
    Joga Krishna Sai et al.; International Journal of Advance Research, Ideas and Innovations in Technology
[4] Kayim,        2014,     Calculation      of     Focal     Length      from     Images,     StackOverflow,      Available   at
     http://stackoverflow.com/questions/18232145/calculationof-focal-length-from-images, Cambridge, UK
[5] https://sci-hub.tw/https://ascelibrary.org/doi/pdf/10.1061/9780784479087.225
[6] https://sci-hub.tw/https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7483225
[7] S. El hazzat, A. Saaidi, A. Karam, and K. Satori. Incremental Multi-view 3D Reconstruction Starting from Two Images
     Taken by a Stereo Pair of Cameras. 3D Research, volume 6, Issue Number 1, Article 11, 2015.
[8] M. Pollefeys, L. Van Gool, M. Vergauwen, F. Verbiest, K. Cornelis, J. Tops, and R. Koch. Visual modelling with a hand-held
     camera. International Journal of Computer Vision, 59(3):207–232, 2004.
[9] SURF            Algorithm           for        object        detection        (module         1)       https://opencv-python-
     tutroals.readthedocs.io/en/latest/py_tutorials/py_feature2d/py_surf_intro/py_surf_intro.html
[10] David G. Lowe, Distinctive Image features from Scale-invariant Keypoints, January 5, 2004
[11] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/3D_reconstruction_from_multiple_images
[12] https://www.pyimagesearch.com/2016/03/28/measuring-size-of-objects-in-an-image-with-opencv/
[13] https://opencv-python-tutroals.readthedocs.io/en/latest/py_tutorials/py_imgproc/py_canny/py_canny.html
[14] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Contraharmonic_mean

APPENDIX
SURF - Speeded Up Robust Features
LiDAR - Laser Imaging, Detection And Ranging
SfM - Structure from Motion




© 2019, www.IJARIIT.com All Rights Reserved                                                                          Page | 594
