Beach or Mountains? Why I’m Not Choosing Sides
I live by the beach and also feel more alive in the mountains. So where do I fit in?

Science tells us that extroverts prefer beach and introverts prefer mountains.
It made me think — I often used “Beach or Mountains?” as a pickup line or decide on a vacation spot. I didn’t think that it could reveal something about my personality.

Looking through this lens, I realized I could never pick one. My answer always depended on my state of mind, who was asking, who I was with, and why I was going.

I choose either or both depending on these factors. And deep down, the state I wanted to achieve, decided my choice.

Let us break down why I want to choose each of them.

Why I Choose Beach🌊
Press enter or click to view image in full size

Beach with clear sky. Image generated by AI program — Grok AI
I lived all my life near the beach in Vizag, a coastal city in India. You may have noticed that coastal people don’t sound too excited when you ask them about beaches. Because it is an abundant resource here.

But I still visit the beach like it is my sacred place.
I visit when I am sad and when I am happy.
I visit to meet socialize as well as to disconnect.
I visit in the morning, as well as evening.
I visit to run, as well to rest.
I visit to escape, as well as live life.

Though in abundance, it is never enough. It never stops affecting me. For me, the beach is a place I find myself in crowds.

Whenever I move to a place without the beach, my longing for the beach kills me. It is not just geography. It’s an emotion.

This doesn’t mean I hate the Mountains — I love them too.

Why I Choose Mountains⛰️
Press enter or click to view image in full size

Mountains above clouds. Image generated by AI program — Grok AI
The first time I fell in love with the mountains is when I saw the view it offers. It was in Vanjangi hills, a recently explored spot near Vizag.

What a great place to look over the clouds. I was literally above the clouds. The clouds drifted past me like a cold wind brushing against skin.
The sunrise painted the sky with orange hues.

And the journey to the top is something that cannot be disliked. It is adventurous at its best. Driving through multiple hair-pin bends and then trekking gave me the ultimate pleasure.

Now, when I look through the perspective of psychology,
I visit when I want to be alone.
I visit when I want adventure.
I visit when I want to enjoy the serene view.
I visit when I want to be above the clouds.

Though the journey is not easy, the trail does leave prints of joy. Mountains are a place where I enjoy being myself.

Why Not Both
Press enter or click to view image in full size

Mountain and Beach. Image generated by AI program — Grok AI
Imagine the best of these two worlds. You enjoy the adventure, the trek, be above clouds and also enjoy the crashing of waves on your feet.

Maybe this imaginary abode can help me find myself through isolation as well as through socialization at the same time.
Maybe I could skydive into the waves directly or walk through clouds that melt into the ocean—like discovering the horizon for the first time.

The possibilities are limitless — almost like a fairy tale.

The idea that beach vs mountains defines that personality doesn’t sit right with me. Maybe I’m just the exception or in the minority that the study doesn’t talk about.

I like both and hope they are not exclusive. I wish science doesn’t categorize us based on this choice and appreciate each one’s choices.

Are you Team Beach or Team Mountain — Or like me somewhere in between?
Drop your answer in the comments — I’d love to know what calls to you.

P.S.Know a place where mountains meet the sea — just like I imagined? Drop in the comments.

I you like this, you might also like this 👇