Dreams Denied: The Hidden Cost of Child Marriage You Need to Know

Sita, an 11-year-old girl from Balampur, starts her day helping her brother get ready for school, finishing her homework, and riding with her father on his bicycle under the open blue sky. She loves spotting cloud shapes and dreams of flying an airplane through them one day.

But her dreams came to an abrupt halt when she was married off to Ramu, a 16-year-old boy from a neighboring village. School was over. Her new daily routine involved caring for her ill mother-in-law, with barely any contact with her brother she once played with. At night she cries under the same sky where her dreams once soared.

This is the story of countless young girls and boys, who were married off as children. Their futures are ruined by this practice. According to UNICEF, over 650 million women alive today were married as children — that’s nearly 1 in 5 globally. This has serious health, social, psychological, and societal impact.

While global trends have declined over the past decade, progress has stalled in many low-income and conflict-affected regions.

Let us learn why child marriages are still prevalent in the world, their impacts, and remedies.

Why Child Marriage?
Social and Religious Factors
Traditional values and practices in many regions encourage child marriage despite prohibition. Additionally, the belief that marriage increases a girl’s social status and provides protection has encouraged this practice for generations.
Poverty
In many Sub-Saharan countries, child marriage is seen as a way to relieve the financial burden of raising children.
Patriarchal Norms and Gender Inequality
Patriarchal norms place less value on girl’s autonomy and prioritize marriage/motherhood. The concept of purity to control female sexuality, has fueled its rise.
Legal Loopholes
Many countries permit child marriage with parental consent enabling its persistence.
Lack of Education
When girls or their parents are uneducated, they lack awareness on the impacts of child marriage.
Conflict and Crisis
In hopes of a better future, underage girls are married off. In some places like Gaza strip, refugee crises tend to encourage child marriage for protection and economic support.
Impact of Child Marriage
Health
A child’s body is not physiologically ready for pregnancy, abortion, and forced sex. It brings immense mental and physical trauma to them. This trauma is often carried over to their children as well.
Psychological
Added responsibilities of marriage, trauma from sudden environmental change, and other successive events in life drain children mentally. If this mental stress is not addressed, it can lead to domestic abuse, isolation, anxiety, and depression-related issues.
Education and Economy
Married girls are less likely to complete secondary education. This in turn limits job and better livelihood opportunities fueling inter-generational poverty.
Human Rights Violation
Child marriage violates rights involving education, health, freedom, and protection from violence.
Demographic
Teen pregnancies worsen the prevalence of adolescent malnutrition. Already stressed teens are put through these hardships which further degrade demographic indicators.
Countering Child Marriage
Vigilance
Laws to enforce age restrictions and strengthen registration systems for marriage.
Awareness
Educate parents about the ill effects of child marriage. Enabling access to welfare schemes for child education, alleviating poverty, and support to discourage norms that encourage child marriage. Global campaigns like Girls Not Brides, UNFPA-UNICEF programme to End Child Marriage help broader outreach.
Educational
Universal free secondary education for girls in high prevalence regions. Additional scholarships to encourage further education and keep girls in school.
Community Engagement
Collaborating with religious leaders, youth, and NGOs to check child marriages. Promote role models and peer education.
Rehabilitation and Livelihood Training
Access to reproductive healthcare, psychological support, and legal aid. Safe shelters for girls for education and vocational training to reintegrate into society.
Elimination of child marriage is a part of Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) set to be reached by 2030 but current annual reduction rate of 1.9% falls short of 23% reduction rate required to eliminate it by 2030.

Child marriage doesn’t just rob children of their dreams — it strips them of their freedom, health, and future. In silencing their voice, we sabotage our collective future.

Healthy and educated children are the backbone to any nation’s growth. By crippling this foundation, we dig our own grave.

If you learned something new, please leave a clap or comment any new perspective to this topic.
Support organizations like Girls Not Brides by sharing this message, donating, or volunteering to help end this injustice. Every child deserves a life free from forced marriage.