From Isolation to Impact: How Volunteering Changed My Life

Gandhi famously quoted, “The best way to find yourself is to lose yourself in the service of others.” This didn’t make sense when I heard it for the first time, but I understood its depth after serving others.

Press enter or click to view image in full size

Gandhi’s quote. image generated by AI program — Grok AI
The Prologue
Until my second year of undergrad I never gave serious thought to others — or even to myself. I had turned into a very isolated person — no connection with peers, no fun, and no collaboration. It was always me and my thoughts —not terrible but not fulfilling either.

One day, on my way to college by bus I happened to be next to the bus door. A girl tried to board the bus and slipped. She fell down, hit hard on the road, and couldn’t get up. Luckily, she did not suffer any injury. It was just a muscle spasm.

There were three to four people who rushed to help her, except me. I just kept watching.
“Am I that cruel to not help someone in need?”
“Do I hate her? — I don’t even know her”
“Am I scared of something? “— I don’t know
“Am I OK?”

These questions filled my thoughts all throughout the week.

This is one of the moments in my life I realized that I don’t want to be the guy who has ringside view of those in need and did nothing.

Press enter or click to view image in full size

A boy not helping a fallen girl even at arms length. Image generated by AI program — Grok AI
The Action
A few weeks after that incident, I joined an NGO called Make a Difference (MAD) as an Academic Support Volunteer (ASV). MAD works with children’s shelter homes across India giving moral and educational support to children who had either lost one or both parents, or had been left behind in shelter homes.


Make A Difference Logo. Source: https://makeadiff.in/
MAD is a very unique NGO. The leadership is very clear on objectives and their timelines to achieve them. They want to make a real change for shelter home children and know that their targets are long term ones.

From its inception, they have evolved a lot. To stay true to their vision, they even reduced the number of shelters, respecting quality over quantity.

As an ASV, I was a mentor for a group of children teaching one subject (mathematics in my case) for 2 hours on the weekend.
I used to show up every week, and the kids would get excited to see their “Anna” (meaning brother in Telugu).

It wasn’t a difficult task — show up prepared with a lesson plan, ensure topics are taught well, and help children grasp them.

Many seniors appreciated my class, as one of my students, Narasimha, had a bad reputation of not sitting even for an hour in any class. But I never faced that issue with him.

It was because of the puzzles that I used to integrate in my classes. It kept him engaged in the class.

Press enter or click to view image in full size

A young boy teaching shelter home kids. Image generated by AI program — Gemini AI
Over the year, I realized that I subconsciously behaved in a responsible manner, to avoid any mistakes from my end that would influence kids.

The Level Up
After that year, I took a leap to become the city manager (fellow, we used to call) for my city chapter. I took this decision so that I could help more kids and help them find a brother or a sister who is like me or even better.

As a fellow, along with seven others as a team we handled recruitment and training of volunteers, assigned classes and kids, facilitated their classes, and helped them raise funds from the city for chapter operations.

It was one of the best years of my life. I found a family in my team — we succeeded, failed together and grew in the process.

We accomplished things we never imagined doing alone. We trained and supported volunteers, collaborated with shelter authorities on smooth functioning, liaised with city directors when in town, and raise funds. All this to make sure every kid in our shelter gets weekly classes.

At the end of the year, we topped the leader board with the highest volunteer participation and we were given additional responsibility of another shelter in town as appreciation of our work.

The Impact
I transformed from an isolated loner into someone who could confidently raised funds from strangers.
I found myself — one who works to help others.
I found a family of friends — after 6 years we are still best of friends and talk often about silly things.
I found a network of similar minds across India —fellows from different city chapters of MAD.

I even learnt from the kids — how they supported each other, broke the ice, and found joy through play or mischief despite their struggles.
I learnt to be happy with what I have.

Volunteering helped me push my boundaries. I always felt there is much to do because I knew I was working for a cause.

I overcame the resistance of starting something new because I owned a responsibility. It ultimately gave me the courage to resign from my corporate job and pursue UPSC Civil Services Exam.

Overall it changed my perspective — from simply working hard to working with passion.

The Epilogue
Volunteering changed me as a person. It helped me find myself, my passion, and close friends.

To echo Gandhi, if you’re unsure or don’t know what you want to become, volunteer — it is a mirror that reflects your best self. It helps you discover things that you might have missed in your life.

If this resonated with you, leave a clap (or 50) and share your own volunteering story in the comments.