Human Beings: The Most Inhuman Beings

Since the start of the Israel-Hamas war in October, 2023, more than 15,000 children died and another 34,000 injured. And, since the Russian invasion on Ukraine began in February 2022, at least 669 children were killed and more than 1800 injured.

We often overlook these crimes in our daily news.

We may not be the direct perpetrators or direct beneficiaries of these horrors. But our ignorance is enough to reflect our inhumanity.

Humans have the capacity for empathy and moral reasoning. But, often act in profoundly inhuman ways— towards fellow humans and non-humans.

The Paradox of Human Consciousness
We comprehend suffering like no other species. We understand pain — both physical and emotional. And yet, we often choose to inflict it.

Animals choose to kill for survival but humans do it for profit, power, control, and ideology.

During wars, we not just take lives, but erase cultures and identities. We humiliate the living as well as the dead. We rape. We dehumanize. We torture not just the bodies but spirits.

All the while, preaching peace.

Dehumanization
Inhuman nature thrives not just through wars, crimes, genocides, rape, or humiliation but also in subtle ways every day:

Waking past a man beating a woman on the street and doing nothing.
Turning away climate disasters, accepting them as our fate
Weaponizing religion, politics, and ethnic identity to create divisions among humans.
We scroll through suffering turning away that “it doesn’t affect me.”

Choosing Apathy over Love
The harsh truth is, we are not inherently evil. We are capable of love too.

We love our children.
We love our nation.
We love our religion.
We empathize with animals’ suffering.

But we are selectively empathetic.

We do not even care for other children.
We do not even care for other nations.
We show hostility to other religions.
We eat the same animals we claim to empathize with.

This makes us more inhuman than any predator.

Some scientists tag us “Super Predator”.

The Systematic Problem
We justify oppression under the guise of development.
We value profits more than people.
We normalize war crimes as a part of jingoism.
We celebrate productivity when millions burn out in silence.
We demean the laborers who produce the things we value.
We hunt down harmless animals for sport, then mourn their extinction.
We created systems that favor the few and leave the rest behind.

This behavior is not individualistic but it’s a collective trait of our species.

But, is there hope?

The Future
In this despair, there is an irony:
The same species that created war also created forgiveness.
The same species that created guns also created medicine.
The same species that created the axe also created sanctuaries.
The same species that created factories also created green technology.

All this shows that, as a species, we are still a work in progress.

We still have to work on how to humanize to become the super philanthropist from the tag of super predator.

If you ever felt helpless seeing innocent children suffering because of greed in this world, you are not alone. It’s your conscience refusing to go numb in the face of inhumanity.

That’s the sign of hope, so let’s keep it alive.

Do you think we‘ve become the opposite of human? Comment your thoughts below.
If this resonated with you, follow me for more such philosophical deep dives.

You might also like 👇