Why the World Fails to Act on Climate Change?

In 2024 alone, nearly 3700 people died and millions were displaced due to 26 extreme weather events linked to climate change — a small slice of 219 events that are recorded that year.

Press enter or click to view image in full size

People protesting for Climate Action. Photo by Mika Baumeister on Unsplash
According to a comprehensive report by Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), a UN body, severe effects — heat waves, droughts, floods, raising seas, species extinction, ocean changes, arctic ice thaws(at least once in a century the Arctic will experience no ice in summer, which hasn’t happened in two thousand years) — are expected to occur when global temperature warms by 1.5°C of pre-industrial levels.

Recent studies confirm that we have already broken the critical 1.5°C threshold. Despite this our climate action hasn’t produced any significant results.

Let us take a closer look at what the world has done so far — and why it is inadequate.

Actions Until Now

United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, UNFCCC, 1992: First global treaty to explicitly address climate change. Ratified by 197 countries. Formed an annual forum, known as the Conference of the Parties or COP, for discussions to stabilize greenhouse gas emissions. The meetings resulted in Kyoto Protocol and Paris Agreement.

Kyoto Protocol, 1997: Entered into force in 2005. It was the first legally binding climate treaty, requiring developed countries to cut emissions by an average of 5% from 1990 levels and establish a system for countries to monitor it.

Kigali amendment, 2016 (to Montreal Protocol): Parties agreed to reduce production of hydrofluorocarbons(HFCs), powerful greenhouse gases. Montreal protocol, 1987, was for reducing chlorofluorocarbons(CFCs), power ozone depleting gases. It was ratified by all countries and successfully eliminated CFCs by 99%.

Paris Agreement, 2015: Most significant global agreement on climate change, requires all countries to set emission pledges, nationally determined contributions(NDC) — nationally set goals, with overall goal of preventing global temperature from raising 2°C(3.6°F) above preindustrial levels. It aims for global net-zero emissions — amount of emissions equals amount removed from the atmosphere — by 2050. United States of America is the only country to withdraw citing unfair burden and economic damage.

Why inadequate?

Global Stocktake report, taken every 5 years to assess the progress on the Paris Agreement, reported in September 2023 reported that current actions fall far short of the long-term goals of the agreement.

According to a 2023 IPCC assessment, earth’s average temperature has already risen by 1.1°C of pre-industrial levels.

Most experts say that the pledges are not ambitious enough and will not be enacted quickly. The policies of signatories could lead to a rise 2.7°C by 2100, according to Climate Action Tracker.

Press enter or click to view image in full size

Climate Action Tracker. Source: climateactiontracker.org
Given these alarming observations, we still don’t see change in our actions to keep the global average temperature under 1.5°C, why?

Reasons

Complexity: Climate change is a multi-layered issue that impacts glaciers, sea levels, water level, rainfall, wind, and a range of natural phenomenon. It is often difficult to understand why burning of coal in Canada to keep people warm is killing corals in Australia which is hard to see.
Lack of Finances: It is estimated that we currently need over $10 trillion per year of climate finance from 2031 to prevent global average temperature rise by 1.5°C. Though there is enough liquidity in the markets, it is unevenly distributed among countries to take coordinated action.
Political Barriers:
1. Ideological Polarization: Environmental policy often divides liberals and conservatives, slowing consensus.
2. Conservative Resistance: Many conservatives view it as a threat to economic interests and traditional values.
3. Governance Challenges: Climate change requires multi-sectoral coordination and levels of governance, creating red-tape.
4. Societal Perception Challenges: Some believe that climate change is beyond repair and only results in futile action.
Collective Action Problem: Climate action requires collective action — individuals, states, and nations. In democracies like India individual choices can undermine unified action.
Jurisdiction & Accountability: Climate change crosses borders, making it hard assign legal responsibility. We cannot link a hurricane in Mexico to miles away emissions from a coal burning plant making jurisdiction and accountability is weak.
Lack of Technological Alternatives: As of 2023, coal and oil usage account for a 55% of energy production. Many climate technology solutions are still in early stages, which require upfront costs that hinder their adoption.
Imagination: Climate change unfolds slowly and silently. We are struggle to imagine its devastation until its too late.
Conclusion

The science is clear. The effects are visible. What we lack is political courage, global cooperation, and a shared sense of urgency.

The path begins with scientific literacy — to bridge political divides and build public trust. We must implement environment justice systems — nationally and globally — that rewards responsible actions and holds polluters accountable.

Climate change is not an isolated issue — it is a defining crisis of our time. We must move beyond agreements to accountability and pledges to action.

The planet will warm or heal based on what we choose to do together right now.

Climate crisis 🌏 isn’t waiting, let us not wait to discuss it either. Share your thoughts in the comments.